Hi. Just a quick message before the next
episode.
My audio is unfortunately
terrible.
However, my cohost Laura and our wonderful guests'
audio is perfect.
So listen to them. Don't listen to me.
Enjoy the episode. Welcome to Cloud Native Compass,
a podcast to help you navigate the vast
landscape of the cloud native ecosystem. We're your
hosts. I'm David Flanagan, a technology magpie that
can't stop playing with new shiny things. I'm
Laura Santa Maria, a forever learner who is
constantly breaking production.
Nervous about cloud native networking?
Intrigued
by Istio.
Today, we're chatting with Matt Turner and Maureen
Obiget, both contributors to the Istio project and
advocates for the new ambient mesh architecture provided
by Istio. With the graduation of the Istio
project and the alpha release of the ambient
mesh architecture,
We have a lot of questions to ask
that Matt and Marino can't wait to answer.
Alright. Hello, everyone. Welcome to this, to this
little session here on Cloud Native Compass. My
name is Marino.
Am a platform slash developer advocate at Solo,
and I focus in on network technologies
spanning from the lower levels all the way
up to service mesh. And I'm I'm here
I'm very excited to talk about ambient mesh
with y'all.
So excited.
So excited. Tell.
Where's the excitement in Marino? Like, come on.
Let's go.
So I'm Matt Turner. I'm a software engineer
at Tetrate.
I focus on fairly similar stuff to Marino,
I guess, looking at service mesh. I've been
into Kubernetes containers, cloud native stuff for for
quite a long time now. Yeah. Also super
excited to to talk about AmiMesh. It's a
really interesting development. Yeah. Lots to lots to
cover.
Alright. Well, I mean, we'll let's just kick
it off. You both said AmiMesh now. So
I have to set it for machines we
can actually properly start.
But for anyone who is not aware of
what is happening in the service mesh space,
particularly around Istio, can we give them the
thirty second of an overview of what is
ambient mesh?
Sure. Yeah. So
ambient mesh is a new mode of operation
in the world of Istio,
and it was
it was developed because there were a lot
of different interesting patterns that we were seeing
with workloads that just never really saw a
benefit to using a sidecar.
A service mesh normally would deploy a sidecar
alongside your main application container,
but we realized that there are certain patterns
that just don't fit with the sidecar model.
So enter ambient mesh where we're effectively removing
the sidecar but still presenting
the service mesh like capabilities
but from a different lens and in a
different architecture.
At the end of the day, ambient mesh
is still service mesh.
It just creates
operational
simplicity and allows you to cut back on
resources
while still retaining all the benefits of what
a service mesh offers.
I guess that's probably what we'll get into.
I mean yeah. So, absolutely,
ambient mesh is is a new a new
mode. So a new, you know, install option
deployment topology for for Istio. It's still still
still Istio.
Yeah. That's the service mesh that's been done
in. There's no reason this couldn't be applied
to to other meshes, but this is an
Istio project we're talking about.
I probably have some, you know, some comments
on on pretty much all of the sort
of, you know, features that were listed there.
Like, we can we can debate those.
But, yeah, the, like, the the 50,000 foot
view is that it's a new deployment mode,
a new architecture for for Istio that, like
Marino says, removes sidecars and replaces them with
a different way of doing things on the
on the data plane. It's still the same
Istio control plane.
Okay. So I'm being managed to move sidecar.
I would hope that this brings substantial
maybe not directly performance,
but at least what computer memory optimizations across
the cluster because,
you know, people are running
this throw out the wonderful 10 number. Right?
A 10 pods and everyone else have nodes,
and they've got 10 nodes. We're talking about
oh my god. I have to do math.
It's only multiples 10. 12 hundred
12 hundred pods, which could be potentially 2,400
containers after and sidecar mode. Right? So while
I'm sure these sidecars
have historically been optimized to be very lightweight,
they're still containers at the end of the
day, which means they still do have a
memory footprint, a compute footprint, and so forth.
What are
I mean, is that directly the benefit of
ambient mesh, is there more to it than
that? There's much more to it. So let's
let's think of the classic example of
the race condition.
So you have certain applications that need to
respond almost immediately,
but when you inject a sidecar into that
model,
one of the the challenges that you have
is that now you have this race condition
of the sidecar versus the application container that
have to come online. Who comes online first?
There might be situations where you have to
set a, what they call, a hold application
timer in the configuration to prevent your main
application container coming online before your sidecar.
In that situation, what ends up happening is
the Istio in that container cannot redirect IP
tables so that traffic can go through the
sidecar first before it gets to the application
container.
Actually, that doesn't even happen. Your application container
is directly
interfacing with other services, and it's not even
part of the mesh at that point.
So one of the approaches that ambient mesh
takes is
you could still inject services into a mesh
without having to deploy this sidecar.
And what ends up happening is there are
resources that sit outside of the application itself
or the pod itself that set up the
redirection of traffic. Now there are some components
that are involved that make this possible. For
example,
are you all familiar with the Istio CNI?
The Istio CNI is is more of a
it's not a CNI replacement, just to be
clear. It's not a container networking interface plug
in. It's actually an add on that you
associate with Istio because
there are certain situations where the security teams
do not want you to hop into your
your pod manifest and specify privileges for those
application containers from a security standpoint. So you
would use the Istio CNI to do a
lot of this, give give it access to
be able to modify those changes at the
the host level, IP tables rewrites,
to allow for pods or applications to communicate
in ambient mesh.
Even outside of ambient mesh, when we're talking
about having sidecars present with that particular security
constraint,
the Istio CNI will help with the redirection
as well without having to modify any sort
of pod manifests.
Now when you think about that for a
second,
when you actually think about what that truly
means,
it just means that we're just redirecting traffic
no differently than we would do inside of
the actual pod itself if a sidecar was
there because that's the operation that goes on
anyways.
Now here's the other consideration,
though. So you don't have a sidecar anymore
in ambient mesh.
Who's actually doing the mesh stuff? Where do
things like MTLS show up? How do we
gain our observability? What happens to things like
authorization policies?
Now that's what's been addressed in ambient mesh
through some some artifacts, two new artifacts. One
is called the z tunnel,
and the other one is called the waypoint
proxy.
Now the z tunnel is
a node level proxy, you could say, which
actually used to be Envoy a long time
ago, and they've rewritten it, in Rust
just to focus in on things like layer
four policy and connectivity,
providing the MTLS, and even providing authentication to
other services.
But what really interestingly happens here is that
when you have traffic that has to go
between nodes and you have, you know, service
to service communication between those nodes,
your traffic actually traverses these z tunnel pods
that exist at the node level.
And these z tunnel pods, again, because they
exist across all the nodes as a daemon
set, they are forming tunnels to each other.
Now
are any of you familiar with tunneling technologies
like IPSec or or VXLAN
or okay. So it's a very, very okay.
So these these tunneling technologies basically create a
virtual private laneway
or network, VPN, basically,
to allow
for a dedicated lane for your your traffic
to move about without
folks being able to inspect and sniff that
traffic and know what's going on behind the
scenes.
They won't be able to understand what payloads
are being sent because all of that is
jumbled and encrypted anyways.
Now we wanna maintain the encryption because we
wanna maintain that security
posture altogether.
But the creative way that we approach this
or that the open source community approach this
is by creating a brand new tunneling protocol
called Hbone or the HTTP based overlay network
encapsulation protocol,
which is another fancy way of saying, hey.
Let's just deploy VXLAN slash Geneva,
four z tunnels to form the tunnels to
each other and create that laneway, which is
all what's going on. But here's the here's
the kicker here.
So all of this is layer four.
When you start to realize that, hey. I
need to inject some layer seven policy. I
don't wanna run get operations against the service.
I need to provide some sort of mechanism
to prevent that. This is where I deploy
a waypoint proxy, which is still Envoy based.
Now I'll stop there because there's a lot
more technical details around it, and, you know,
maybe Matt might wanna expand on that a
little bit more. Yeah. I mean, I'd probably
like to get right back to the the
beginning. Right? So, I mean, the the race
condition that was mentioned is
I I mean, say that's an implementation detail.
It's it's definitely real. It's definitely a concern.
There is a at the moment, yeah, there's
the the solution to that is to hold
the application back. There's the Monzo open source,
like a a wrapper that does that, like
an idiot wrapper that does that.
You know, there's there's various sort of ways
to fix it at the moment, but there's
a, you know, there's a KEP out to
to fix this in Kubernetes. So this is
this is kinda well known. It's understood.
A network sidecar is not the only kind
of sidecar container that has this issue. So
there's a there's a in progress to identify,
like, the main application container and the sidecars
and ensure that ordering. Right? So to me,
that's an implementation detail. Like, it's it's being
fixed.
I'm not sure the thing about the init
containers is actually true. Like, they are guaranteed
to run before any of the sidecar or
any of the sort of main runtime containers
run, even the sidecar. So it's the init
container that sets up the
interception,
the IP table's interception. So so and that
is guaranteed to run to completion before the
application container runs or the sidecar.
So, again, I'm not quite sure about,
you know, what's what's maybe going on there
with, with the security. Like, those IP tables
rules would always be in place. Sure. The
sidecar might not be ready by the time
the app has come up, so the traffic
will get black hole,
which is an availability concern, but it's not
a security concern because we know those interception
rules will already be in place.
What Istio CNI is, yeah, like Marino says,
it's not another, like, CNI, like another, actual
overlay network, but it's a CNI wrapper because
you can stack these these,
CNI plugins. So it'll,
what it does is it basically runs so
with the job of a CNI the job
of an actual, like, CNI plugin,
is to just provide a network interface into
the pod. Right? When the pod's being made,
your CNI plug in will make a a
TAP or a Veth or whatever your, you
know, whatever your underlying or or do some
e b p f, whatever your underlying network
wants.
And you can stack them. So if you
put the Istio CNI in first, it'll just
run first. It doesn't actually make a network
interface, but what it does is set up
those IP tables interceptions rules so that you
don't need an init container.
And the argument for that is folks don't
want to give the init so the reason
the init container exists is firstly to fix
that race condition, and secondly, so the init
container can have the high privileges you need,
like the CAPNET admin that you need to
set up IP tables.
Some folks aren't even happy with that, with,
like, with that init container having that those
permissions.
You can use the CNI just to run
that previous code, like, somewhere else, at the
host before the pod comes up. So, again,
kinda implementation detail, but both of those, like,
you, get rid of that,
get rid of that race condition. And, like,
the pod manifest is is,
you know, like, never needs to be modified
for either of those solutions. Like, it's modified
at runtime with the with the AnyContainer, but
that's done transparently by by IstioD.
So, yeah, there's there's, like, a lot of
implementation details you have to you have to
understand
to to really kinda grok what's what's going
on here and then why you might choose
between the two different modes.
So it's clear that it's going to be
a choice between
specifically.
That's what you're mentioning. Like, you don't really
run them together on one cluster. Correct?
Like a sidecar implementation and an ambient mesh
implementation. You can actually yeah. Namespace by namespace.
Is that right, Marino? Is that the yeah.
I guess. Yeah. That's right. I mean, the
way you go about enabling sidecar versus nine
side non sidecar is just a label that
you affix to the namespace itself.
So Mhmm. In the case of sidecars, you
do the Istio dash injection equals enabled label,
whereas the,
for ambient mesh, right, in another namespace, you
actually specify a data plane mode equals ambient.
Can't remember the actual label,
but there's actually a very interesting difference between
the two.
So,
the race condition was one particular example of
an issue, very corner case, but there's another
issue as well. If you're already running workloads
that are running in production today, to inject
the sidecar means you have to do a
rollout of your deployment
so that the sidecars can be injected into
new pods that get deployed,
which which actually can be a little bit
of a hit in terms of being online.
So in the situation where you're not deploying
sidecars, you're using ambient mesh, none of that
ever happens because all we're really doing at
this point is
and I'm gonna use an example from way
back in the day of IPsec.
In IPsec,
right, when you form tunnels,
one thing you had to define was interesting
traffic.
Those interesting traffic would be defined through access
control lists.
And as long as your your, whatever proxy
or gateway that you're using can identify
that this traffic has to be matched to
be encrypted and tunneled,
then that traffic would proceed to go through
encrypted.
This is very much the same way how
ambient mesh would work is that you
have a namespace that has been labeled
for direction towards
ambient mesh, ambient mesh enabled, but also direction
towards the z tunnels. So traffic will get
redirected, but this doesn't happen inside of the
main application container at all. In fact, this
is where the Istio CNI comes in to
to help with that. So it's not intrusive,
especially when it comes to to production workloads.
You can just deploy ambient mesh.
Hold on. There's a caveat here because ambient
mesh is still experimental at this point. I
wouldn't say just run it in production.
But
having said that, the goal and the mindset
here is to prevent production outages or downtime
as you're deploying services into your mesh.
So, I mean, yeah, the, just to clarify,
I guess, the, like, sidecar is never intrusive
either. Like, you never need a change to
the application code or even to the application,
like, deployment YAML that you submit to the
API server because the mutating webhook admission controller
will,
will go and alter it for you. So,
yes, those IP tables exist, but they don't
affect, like, the container. They exist within the
pod because a pod is a set of
c groups and a set of namespaces.
IP tables route rules are scoped to a
network namespace, so they exist in that namespace.
And they live because they've been set up
either by the Istio CNI
or the or the init container, you know,
they persist within that namespace. And, actually, when
the application comes up, it has no idea
that that they're there.
The other thing about, you know, rolling it
out, like retrofitting at runtime,
like, yeah, it is you know, if if
you or if you're running an application and
you're in production,
and you want to retrofit SideCast to something
that's that's running, I would probably say as
an ops person, that's that's maybe a bit
of a bad move. You should, you know,
try it in staging stuff first. But, yeah,
if it gets to the point in, you
know, in production when you want to,
you wanna roll this out, I I guess
I'd kinda challenge, you know, the idea that
that's
that's gonna be disrupted because you've got a
Kubernetes deployment. So if you just if you
change the manifest, you just do a rolling
update. It's gonna honor your your min unavailable,
your max unavailable. It's gonna honor your pod
disruption budget. Like, if you're in a position
where you can't, you know, one by one
in a controlled manner, restart these pods.
I mean, remember Kubernetes builds in a surge
to keep your, like, your availability,
your your load carrying capacity. If you're in
a position where you can't do that, then
you can't do any disaster recovery. You can't
release any new versions. You you can't do
any upgrades. So I think, you know, anybody
who's deployed into Cube, anybody who's cloud native
is not kind of staring at, like, that
Windows box in the corner that they that
they really can't touch.
So, yeah, like, Ambien does let you sort
of retrofit the networking under the under the
carpet while it's running, but I've not come
across anybody for whom that's necessary, anybody who
can't just do a a Kubernetes running update.
Yeah. Lots of
interesting details there. And I'm gonna do my
best to recap all of this in, like,
thirty seconds because it helps me understand. Right?
I I wanna make sure I understand what's
actually happening. Although I did first, in fact,
there's two things I wanna cover first. Let
the record show I was not the first
person to say Rust. Yeah. We're literally there.
Just throw it out.
That's true. I was waiting for to interrupt,
like, the whole conversation.
I was like, yes, even as I I
wasn't first. Anyway
and secondly, obviously, the comment about the Windows
box that we can't touch. Like, it just
made me happy, like, a flashback to, like,
when we used to work at offices, and
I used to do a lot of operational
stuff myself. It's like, there was always this
I g IP address because Peng, but nobody
knew what it was. And I always felt
like, you know, every office had one of
those at one point. Anyway
so
recap.
It's just so that I understand. Right? We
have Istio. We have SAICAR based container mesh.
It uses any containers
to do all of the IP table rules
that are needed to satisfy the constraints for
the pods to able to probably be part
of the the mesh network and take advantage
of all the mesh stuff.
There there's a whole bunch of reasons of
why that may have to change. There's always
the compute memory things that we can optimize.
There's some security concerns, and there's just application
availability things that disappear if we don't need
to worry about it. Of course,
Now ambient mesh wants to change that model.
And while you can run-in hybrid is what
we've heard, I suspect most people would just
want to move towards ambient mesh.
And we said we'll ship it to prod,
but I'm already thinking of doing it today
anyway. So, I mean, maybe a little bit
too late for my cluster.
But it runs
a z tunnel, which is a new proxy
written in REST that is assuming it's just
a demon set, which is part of the
SDO deployment.
And instead of injecting sidecars, you have mission
controls or otherwise,
it handles all the IP table tools as
the pods come up and come down, etcetera,
and we still have a complete mesh
network. Or maybe the z tunnel doesn't handle
IP table rules. I'm not entirely sure at
this point, but it does things. There was
also that second component that mentioned,
which was The the waypoint. Yeah. The waypoint.
Yeah. Can we get what what does that
do?
So the waypoint is the one that actually
processes a lot of the layer seven heavy
duty lifting or heavy lifting. Lifting. So for
example,
you specify an authorization policy normally in Istio
that,
prevents services from doing certain things to other
services, and we're talking about HTTP.
This is where the waypoint proxy come in
because a sidecar used to do that for
us.
So
the the thing about that waypoint proxy is
it has to run Envoy to be able
to achieve this. I mean, I'm sure in
the future, they might change up the implementation,
but I I can't confirm that because I
don't even know what the road map looks
like. But I will say that
anytime that you have that requirement to deploy
layer seven,
what ends up happening is you actually deploy
this at this at the destination workload.
So for example,
you have workloads that exist on two nodes,
and you have workload a that needs to
communicate with workload b,
but you need to do some sort of
HTTP request, some methods, whatever it is.
But you also wanna prevent service a from,
you know, deleting any sort of information off
of service b. So you would implement a
policy, normally a layer seven auth policy.
Now who enforces that actually ends up being
the waypoint proxy, which gets deployed at,
at the the destination node,
for that destination workload, and this is based
on a per workload basis. Now here's the
other interesting thing,
that
waypoint proxy actually leverages
the the latest
gateway API standard.
So the gateway API standard is one that
allows us to effectively bring in a a
lot more of a cleaner ingress into our
cluster, plus be able to do things like
TLS termination and even things like,
we could even do the releases that we
would want to through this gateway API spec
where previously,
it was a little bit harder to harder
to achieve because you need ingress controllers, ingress
resources,
and a lot of interesting math.
That being said,
with that waypoint proxy, it's deployed on a
per needed basis. If you don't need it,
if you're not running any sort of layer
seven services or don't have that requirement, you
drop it because it is one of those
resource intensive
artifacts that get deployed to the cluster. And
when you get to that level of scale
where everything needs
layer seven proxy or layer seven authorization or
something, this is where you're evaluating your design.
Like, maybe we should probably be using a
combination of sidecar and sidecar list for certain
situations.
This is gonna be a design
versus,
you know, let's just do it.
Now one other bit about the waypoint is
that
it's actually in line of traffic with the
z tunnels, and it actually terminates
a z tunnel at the the local node.
So for example,
service a talking to service b between two
nodes, service a would traverse one z tunnel
on its local node, collocated with it, and
service b would receive that traffic. But first,
that traffic has to pass through the destination
node z tunnel,
which then
tunnels to the waypoint proxy.
The waypoint proxy is what releases that traffic
and then basically passes it along to the
actual workload.
Yeah. So the way yeah. The waypoint, actually
is Envoy. Right? So current in a sidecar
model or the sidecars are are are are
Envoys.
With Ambient, you've got a z tunnel, which
does layer four stuff,
one per node, and then, yeah, there's a
waypoint,
the per service account,
right, for,
for for isolation. So there's a there's a
waypoint per service account, so kind of per
per workload, that you jump through.
I guess the thing is you kinda
you kinda always have to jump through it
because, you know, okay. If you don't do
layer seven policy, then then fine. But this
is an identity based
mesh. Right? If you're not doing, you know,
like, four policy is is the reason you're
running a service mesh is probably because you're
finding that insufficient.
And, also, if you want any anything that,
like, interacts with HTTPs, if you want any
observability
of particular API endpoints, you wanna even even
understand what's a request response, what's a success
and a failure. If you want any kind
of distributed tracing, you've gotta be involved with
HTTP, passing HTTP.
So realistic while the model is theoretically good,
like, realistically, basically, everything is gonna go through
a waypoint. So it into, like, those those
latency saving claims, those kind of resource saving
claims maybe don't apply for for real world
workloads because you, you know, you kinda always
want them. And then you get into the
issue that the waypoints are shared. So all
of the security guarantees around,
you know, having a dedicated, like, firewall, a
dedicated policy enforcement point agent per per workload
go away. Like, it's not even really it's
not zero trust anymore. Right? Because a party
is trusting something. It's trusting a shared
z tunnel, which is actually shared across tenants
because they're per node. And it's and that
thing is holding the keys and the certificates
for, like, all of the workloads it represents.
And they're also trusting
a shared waypoint. And Envoy, remember, was designed
as a sidecar proxy, so it that, like,
makes no attempt to mitigate noisy neighbors. It
has no resource management, you know, of its
own. It, again, represents a confused deputy, like
a a place for for lateral movement. So
I think that's the big trade off that
that I talk to folks about is you
can get some some theoretical resource,
you know, wins on on ambient. But, again,
I, like, would kinda challenge that with this
sort of sort of kernel internals to think
about. Modern systems are quite complicated.
But the trade off is that security posture.
I just was going to say real quick,
for people who are listening and
are very, very confused by the references to
layer seven,
Just to note, we'll put a link in
the podcast description about what the OSI model
is and what all these layers are.
So don't worry, you can read more about
that. I don't want to go deep down
into some very, very basic stuff. But this
is at the very, very top of your
networking model on the application layer we're talking
with layer seven. I don't know how far
down the layers they go
with
sidecar and ambient mesh.
So if you want to just I I
I think I heard, like, there were some
stuff at layer four and layer three, but
just to double check. I mean, there are
all the options. Right? The resource
what? Layer three and four are pretty much,
Steven, and layer seven. Nobody else even knows
what the list is. Right? Yeah. None of
others. Oh, well,
depends on who you're talking to and what
the her history is. But regardless,
just so that you know, we will put
a link in the descriptions. Alright. Go ahead.
Yeah. So one thing I was just going
to to add, and I agree with Matt.
Like, there are there are definitely trade offs
when considering something like ambient mesh. Right?
And it really will come down to your
own personal require or your business requirements, what
you need,
if you have the the suitable amount of
resources, if you don't need layer seven authorization.
But the one thing I wanted to clarify
is the element of identity.
So
even in that shared service model,
there is tendency that exists both at the
zTunnel as well as the the waypoint level.
And this is derived through the whole, you
know, Kubernetes service account token generation
and how
zTunnel and Waypoints will assume the identity of
those given workloads for that given traffic path.
Even if even if, for example, you have
that shared service model,
the the idea behind what zTunnel and and
Waypoint are offering up is that that slice
of that part of that laneway.
So it still maintains separation and isolation,
but here's the other consideration. Right? Like, this
has come up a lot. You know, what
happens if your node gets compromised?
You know, now I can have access to
zTunnel. Now I can, you know,
impersonate zTunnel and then direct traffic elsewhere to
another environment that you wouldn't even know of.
If you're at that point, you haven't spent
the time to lock down your Kubernetes environment,
and you've just basically given access.
Root access is probably the most dangerous thing
you can have inside of your cluster.
So in those sorts, you know, situations, it's
not about service mesh at that point. It's
about how you've built security practices and posture
into how you run Kubernetes.
So
in the situation where you have workloads that
exist within a node that are communicating,
the the fascinating part about it is they're
never gonna pass through a z tunnel. Right?
They're gonna communicate directly on the wire through
the CNI.
And
they're even though they're a part of the
mesh, I mean, there's no MTLS going on.
There's plain text traffic going on.
But that's not the issue. The issue is,
is your cluster secure?
Have you prevented unauthorized access?
Do you have the right controls in place?
Are you using certificates?
Who has access to your your KubeConfig?
In fact, almost no one should have access
to that if you're using principles of GitOps
at that point.
So there are a lot of other considerations
that fall well outside of what ambient mesh
can control. Like, it's not gonna save you
from your infrastructure challenges.
It's gonna solve parts of the network challenges
that you're trying to solve with service to
service communication.
Yeah. No. I agree. Like, if you yeah.
Like, Marina says, if you're at the point
where, you know, your your node your host
has been popped, then they'd they'd be in
the sidecar the same way they're in the
the waypoint and the z tunnel.
I mean, there's different ways of popping things.
Right? If they've got something like root access,
like access to kind of the kernel,
then all bets are off.
I guess the thing about the the z
tunnel and the fact that, you know, no
local communication does bypass it, there's no NTLS.
Like, if you get compromised in the sense
that somebody can break out of their container,
get into the root namespace,
like, maybe they've got you know, maybe they
don't have the root user, but they're in
the root namespace or they've they've got privileges
to it because you ran a privileged container
or you ran in host namespace or something.
Then, you know, sidecars will give you a
mutual TLS on the wire even locally on
the node, whereas, yeah, the z tunnel, the
z tunnel doesn't. It gets bypassed. So there's,
like, different ways of it. It's a it's
a complicated thing to threat model. And I
anyway,
and I I feel like it gets more
complicated to threat model
with Ambient because the the topology gets more
complicate. You've got these two moving parts, and
your topology gets a lot more complicated. It's
more difficult to reason about.
But, yeah, absolutely. Like, if you've, like Marina
says, there's so many other controls you should
be putting in place.
We maybe are getting into the, you know,
into the weeds a little bit. Well, except
unless you're you're regulated, and the regulator, like,
requires that you have to have TLS on
the wire.
It's the same with the resources. Like, you
know, I'd, I'd probably wanna challenge a bunch
of the, like,
numbers that have come out around resource usage.
I think, actually, the kernel, like, helps you.
I think sidecars can actually be equivalent to
ambient mesh in in almost all cases.
But by the time, you know, by the
time you're looking at that, have you actually
got the requests for your application right? Have
you rewritten the Ruby and Rust? Have you
sorted out your HPA and your cluster auto
scaling? Are you using spot instances correctly? You
know, what's the stat? Like, the average e
c two is 3% utilized.
There's so much more low hanging fruit than
than looking at that resource that resource question
at all. You know, if you get there,
can talk about it. But,
yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. I agree with Marina
that she's probably not excuse me. The low
hanging fruit. Yeah. I don't know if I
misheard something there or maybe
something I don't know. Someone mentioned node local
doesn't go through the z tunnel.
Is that one sentence correct?
Yeah. So if you have services that would
exist within the same node, right, pod to
pod communication won't pass through the z tunnel.
So think of a traditional firewall and you
have a a subnet behind that firewall.
Do
two computers ever pass through that firewall if
they're gonna talk directly to each other on
the network? No.
And that's the same situation as to how
it works inside of ambient mesh with
resources that exist on the same node.
Now
there are ways to work around that too,
but quite honestly, you know, this is where
we're starting to get complex and we start
to realize maybe we should start using sidecars
again.
So this is why the you know, it's
situational. It's not gonna be either or. It's
gonna be and and, you know, bits here,
bits there, pieces all over, and now you
have this, like, kludge of a mess a
messy mesh at this point. Right. Yeah. I
mean, so, yeah, side cards, you know, were
reaction, I guess. The idea probably came out
of Google originally, right, with envelope and and
whatever, client side load balancing. They were a
reaction. Like, firstly, the middle proxies, which nobody,
I think, has had a good experience with.
Right? So you do your client side load
balancing instead in the same way that, like,
a, you know, a history library or a,
like, gRPC client does.
And also a reaction, like, Reena says to
those kind of firewall setups, right, where if
you're in a trusted subnet,
then, you know, any workload in that subnet
just talks to another just talks to its
neighbor and doesn't go through the firewall. This
is where the whole, like and that's not
sufficient in a bunch of cases. So that's
where the whole zero trust thing came from.
And then see, there's non, you know, non
cloud native, non mesh implementations of this, like
Cisco ACI will will sell you that kind
of dream as well. But the idea is
taking that boundary and making it making it
real small. You know, there's still there's still
a gateway. There's there's still a boundary, and
there's still a border device.
You know, with with sidecast, with a service
mesh, you know, the boundary is the network
namespace. The boundary is the one part. It's
the smallest it can be, and the the
border device is the Envoy. And that, I
guess, with z tunnel, that's what you're that's
what you're kinda giving up, because, you know,
yeah, node local, you don't have any encryption
at all. And even if it between nodes,
then you're plain text from the, you know,
the application to the z tunnel. So you're
leaving that network namespace. You're leaving that that
isolated network and those guarantees. So, yeah, it's
it's you gotta understand how it works. It's
something to to consider when you're looking at
the trade offs.
I'm smiling because you you basically brought Cisco
into the chat. And and it's funny because
And it couldn't it's really fun. No. No.
It's it's great that you did you brought
this up because
back when I was working at VMware under
the networking security business unit,
we competed heavily against Cisco and ACI. Right?
But they were talking about the exact same
things that we're talking about today. Like, nothing
I'll be honest. Nothing has changed in networking
other than the fact that we're dealing with
smaller artifacts.
Nothing has changed. You go look at a
networking namespace. What is it? How does it
get constructed? We're just building,
quote, unquote, a VLAN at this point, attaching
endpoints to it, creating, you know, connections to
the outside world, and there you go. Now
your pods have access to the outside world
or other pods.
So nothing we've done is different, and it's
it's interesting because I know Cisco
and what they're up to right now, and
they're breaking into the whole cloud native space.
They they have, like, their own CNI. They
have an Istio offering as well or a
service mesh offering.
But they haven't adopted
their own mindset
and methodology
for those kinds of systems that they're developing
for cloud native, which is funny because they're
the ones that championed a lot of these
architectures that we see today.
We're just, like, repurposing
them in cloud native.
So it's it's it's interesting you brought that
up. And, you know, quite honestly, like, I
when I think of companies like Cilia oh,
sorry. Isovalent and what they're doing with Sillyum
and how they're bringing up service mesh into
their own offering,
I am I feel like nostalgia,
and I feel like deja vu as in
terms of, like, going back in time with
networking all over again.
Yes. Same. Yeah. The reason I brought ACI
because I couldn't actually think of anything else
that offered that. I may well be completely
wrong, but I couldn't NSX. VMware NSX. Yeah.
Of course. That's why I worked at Cisco.
Right? So I guess yeah. That's why I
thought of, ACI.
But, yeah, that idea of, like, of east
west controls without having to, like, headpin through
the firewall. And it was always a choice,
like Marina says. It was always a choice
back in the day. We're having the same,
you know, the same discussion, like, how small
do I make my broadcast domains, my VLANs?
How small do I make those subnets? Because
the smaller I make them, the more traffic
goes through the firewall, but I then I
need to pay for more firewalls and the
more administrative overhead I get. So it's the
same kind of trade off. But, like, with
I think the difference is with with an
ACI or NSX
or a or a sidecar based service mesh,
you can get to that, like, you know,
minimal
one workload, you know, one Unix process, one,
you know, network domain, one subnet.
And you can have you know, you can
get to that proper zero trust, you know,
zTunnel is is trading that off for other
things. But, yeah, same conversations we've been having,
what, ten, twenty years. Even before that, even
before the NSX stuff, like, folks were just
buying a lot of firewalls with a lot
of ports and making real small subnets. Right?
Alright. So
I love that you also mentioned IstioVeal and
and Cilium. Right? Their CI implementation is purely
driven with eBPF and the IP tables. Like,
I guess the the question just floating around
these are right now. It's like, why is
eTunnel in a gateway? Why why is eBPF
not the choice here?
So I I will say that from
an innovation standpoint, I don't know how much
is going on in the Istio world with
eBPF. I know that there's some PRs that
are open to use eBPF as an optimization
for redirecting traffic.
At Solo, we're doing it. So
if you decide, hey. You know,
I'm done using open source. I need something
a little bit more elaborate,
and I wanna take advantage of eBPF optimizations.
Well, there is an offering, through Solo, through
their Blue platform. But having said that, like,
even when you look at Cilium and Isovalent,
they basically are the ones that pioneered
sidecar list through their eBPF offering.
Now having said that, right, when you're looking
for completeness of a service mesh,
maybe they don't have it all there. It's
not already.
They'll give you parts of it. And if
you're already deeply ingrained in using Cilium CNI,
I mean, it doesn't hurt to turn on
the service mesh functionality and test it out.
But then when you're trying to leverage a
lot of the capabilities,
fault tolerance, resiliency that that is built into
what sidecars offer, what even sidecarless offers,
that's gonna be a bit of a challenge
working inside of, you know, a
you know, look. I I'm gonna say this,
but this is just my opinion. A switch
that does multilevel or multilayer networking versus
a different control plane that handles specific
elements of
of, you know, what a service mesh does.
So
the way I look at it is, okay.
It's nice that you have this single control
plane that does it all, but then where
do you compromise versus taking the other approach
where you use a few control planes that
work together to provide you that full stack
network,
and then you use something like GitOps to
control your network or deploy and manage and
scale your network. Yeah. No. Yeah. Yeah. I
think I'd agree with that. Cilium's an interesting
one. Good eBPF has got is great. Right?
It's a great technology. It's got a it's
got a lot of hype. It's not just
the networking stuff. Right? It's so you have
FOLCO, for example, uses BPF to, like, hook
a bunch of, you know, instrumentation points and
do essentially EDR.
But, yeah, like, BPF programs can call this
XDP library, express data path, and set up
fast networking in the kernel. So Istio, yeah,
Istio does use it. I think it's an
option. It's maybe default now. Like, don't quote
me on that, Marino. You might know. But
for yeah. For the acceleration. When I was
saying IP tables before, I mean, like, the
interception of traffic, you know, comes into a
pod, comes into a network namespace. It's gotta
go through the sidecar back out again.
Can be IP tables. It can also actually
be BPF, you know, and plus XDP,
which is which is usually quicker. I think
that might even be the default now. BPF
also gets you folks get confused, think, because
the same text used in a couple of
places, but, yeah, Cilium uses it to implement
a like, the CNI layer, to build that
overlay network. It's when you're outside of the
pod, when you're outside of the network namespace,
to build that overlay network in that, you
know, WeaveNet setup tunnels.
Flannel relies on you sending your own routes
in the host. There's various ways to do
it. Citium uses BPF and gets gets a
bunch of advantages from that,
but they are kinda separate. I think to
your original question, David, of, like, if we
have BPF is so powerful
and we have it sitting there implementing CNIs,
like, why do we need a z tunnel?
One
could imagine that a more sophisticated enough
networking layer could do that. One could maybe
imagine a cloud provider
who had a sophisticated,
you know, VPC technology
might actually be able to replace the z
tunnel all the z tunnel layer four functionality
with their own SDN.
I couldn't possibly comment, but, like, you can
you can see how that technology would would
plug together. Right? And then, absolutely, that's great
because, you know, nothing nothing wrong with that.
So, yeah, that's I think that's gonna be
an implement,
interesting
development to to watch.
Yeah. So I just wanted to add to
that. So there's a company called Merbridge that
actually developed the EBPS solution for Istio.
And I think the Istio community has decided
to adopt that approach altogether. I don't know
when it's gonna show up. I think there
is a PR open for it right now.
But that being said, like, it it's an
option. If you are comfortable and are willing
to use eBPF for sidecar optimizations,
then absolutely go for it. But, you know,
the other side to that is
if you decide, hey. I wanna get fancy
with eBPF programming,
that might not be the best place to
do it because it's pretty
static in some ways, right, in terms of
that that whole configuration stack. The other side
to it too is
when you start off, you know, when you
start off deploying a service mesh,
you don't wanna just throw everything
at your applications.
Start small. Right? Maybe you you realize that
you don't need eBPF to optimize
because you don't have a lot of that
cross traffic going on. Your latency is not
as high as you think it is. So
it will come down to a decision point
as well. I mean, there's the other side
to it too around stability.
Are you going to take something that's been
experimental,
run that in production? Probably not. Right? Which
is why ambient mesh is still experimental right
now.
But having said that, I'll plug something. So
Istio
has officially graduated. In fact, you should see
the announcement very shortly,
which means there's gonna be a lot more
traction around the consumption of Istio. You're gonna
see a lot more vendors pop in and
say, hey. Maybe we want to contribute more
to the ambient side because it fits our
model very well.
So that's a super exciting thing for us.
I mean, the community has poured in a
lot of work to make this possible.
You you see how service mesh and networking
in the cloud native space have become prioritized
for your workloads. It's become important much more
so than it was four years ago.
And it's only because of the manipulations you
can do inside of both a mesh and
a CNI that you weren't able to do
before. So it provides a lot of design
flexibility in terms of whether or not you
deploy ambient, whether you decide you're gonna use
just the ingress gateway functionality,
or maybe I just wanna turn on sidecars
because I want that observability. I wanna be
able to do distributed tracing very effectively and
see all my different service requests and the
paths and see, you know, how these services
are tied together and where things are failing.
Right? So it'll come down to the use
cases. There is no one size fits all
model.
There is no one solution or silver bullet
that'll do it all.
No. Absolutely. That's why I'm excited about Ambient.
Right? It's, you know, it's more choice. Choice
is always good. And how how long has
the Istio project been out? I was trying
to think. Six years or something? Six years.
Yeah. Six years. So and it's graduated. Right?
It's in one dot x, one dot 18
now. It's it's pretty mature, but that's still,
like, this is a real change. There's real
innovation. There's real dynamism.
So, yeah, super excited to see that happening.
Super excited to see the choice.
But like Marino says, you know, it's horses
for courses. You gotta understand what, you know,
what you're turning on.
But I would say test it with your
own, you know, workloads. Actually, look at your
own numbers. You know, do your own threat
models. Look at your own regulatory environment.
Yeah. David, when you said you were gonna
just push it to prod, like it is
alpha still. It is still you know?
I mean, I missed the journalist episode. So
Well,
depends how long you take to to edit
it. Yeah. But
I
do feel like there's some obligatory x k
c d that we need to put in
here, though. Like, I mean, I I have
to admit. Like, I listen to all this,
and sometimes I just kinda think, we
have 16 standards. We should have one standard
that unifies everything.
Couple months later, we have 17 standards.
Yeah. So that's all I kinda think about
sometimes when I hear, well, we're using this
and that and the other. But I can
tell you. I mean, gateway gateway API is
that same. I mean, let's be honest. Like
you said,
networking hasn't really changed. We just changed the
scale of it. So maybe there's an x
k c d in there as well. Who
knows? But I think, like, Marino says, like,
folks are
I I personally feel like we're getting more
mature. The actual cloud native thing. Right? Like,
folks, we're going into cloud, and, you know,
I was at various consultancies and whatever, and
we were always saying, like, you've got like,
lifting and shifting, like, being in the cloud
is not enough. You've gotta be cloud native.
And I think the act the sort of
lift and shift or the, like, the naive
cloud architectures
happen for a lot longer than I maybe
thought they would.
And folks are now realizing that they've got
all their microservices and all of this, and
it's great. And they've built a distributed system,
you know, what used to be, like, one
monolith
with dependency injection and and, you know, an
ORM. We we got quite good at building
monoliths, right, really, with, like, interface driven design
and stuff.
And, like, if if namespace a calls namespace
b, it can't fail. You're just putting a
program counter on the stack and calling jump.
Right? Like, basically,
instant never fails. You've now built a distributed
system. You've probably got distributed transactions. You've got
failure modes you never thought of.
And the network is, yeah, is the way
to fix that. Right? So I think we're
finally becoming, like, actually cloud native in this
exactly like Marino says. We gotta realize we
we need to leverage with there's a whole
bunch of stuff. We've gotta get that observability
back that we have by just attaching a
debugger to our massive process. We've gotta get
the control
back that we had with dependency injection systems
and the sort of, you know, different routing
they could do in test builds.
And like a service mesh is is,
I think, the way to do that. And
we're yeah. So networking and meshes are coming
forefront as people realize that they absolutely need
this stuff, and you you can't build a
system properly without it. So it's yeah. So
as somebody who's always been into networking stuff,
it's it's fun to see. Alright. We're very,
very close to the end of the ever.
So
I'll now give you both the opportunity just
to show us a plug, and if anything
you want, feel free to take, you know,
couple of minutes, whatever you need to share
your Twitter, your website, your company, your products,
your OnlyFans. Go for it. Have fun. Marino,
why don't you take it away first?
Yeah. So if everyone can see the video,
I've thrown my Twitter handle on there, so
you're welcome to kinda see some of the
the shitposts that I put out there about
networking and perspectives and even service mesh.
But one thing that I noticed last year
was that there was a lack of understanding
of how networking worked inside of Kubernetes. And
I, you know, sought out to build a
workshop, built the workshop, delivered it a few
times, and it's become a thing. So if
you really wanna understand what's going on in
the OSI model, I've built a workshop called
network foundations.
It can be accessible at academy.solo.io.
Head over there, register,
and then you could take the workshops in
two parts. You get the first bit that
covers, you know, IP addressing, subnetting, understanding routing,
DNS, and even working with a little bit
of HTTP.
And then the second part focuses in on
why we use proxies, how to how to
set them up so that you could start
doing things like load balancing or filtration of
packets or or traffic all the way to
understanding how networking namespaces are built and why
you wouldn't do this today.
Instead, you'd use a CNI because it takes
care of all the IP address management and
the onboarding and offboarding of pods. And then
we end at Kubernetes networking to understand how
pods communicate on a network in Kubernetes
and how we expose them to the outside
world. So go check it out. Academy.solo.i0networkfoundations.
Alright. You're talking about Matt. What do have?
Do you want me to screen share the
only fans? Or
There we go. Let's do it. In this
visual medium of a podcast, it's gonna be
great. Yeah. Maybe I maybe I maybe I
won't get It's on YouTube too. It's fine.
But if I also put the link to
the course on the Twitter and it show
up as well You can you can get
fans back. But go for it, Matt. Yeah.
Cool. Yeah. So I'm Matt Turner. If you
don't wanna follow the my shit posts,
fairly similar flavor, I guess. I'm at m
t one six five
on Twitter, and then there's links for there
to the the other nascent socials that are
coming along.
Yeah. I've done a a, you know, fair
amount of talks. I got a website, mt165.co.uk.
That's got links to the videos with all
of those. I talk about networking and service
mesh and Kubernetes and stuff.
I work at Tetrate, so we have a,
like, a management plane. We didn't get into
it, but we've got a management plane over
various Istio control planes. So all the stuff
we were talking about, you know, where do
you,
which control plane do you use? Where do
I configure layer four versus, you know, layer
seven? Do I use how how do I
use Istio CNI policies in
sorry, Kubernetes CNI, like network policies in addition
with
Istio features? You know, the management plane kinda
transparently takes care of all of that. And
we've also involved with a bunch of the
open source projects. So we're we're begin to
they get the new gateway API stuff, which
I think is super exciting for everybody. And,
hopefully, you know, it's the seventeenth standard that
will actually replace them all because it is
looking really good. Istio supports it. You know,
lots of other stuff is supporting it. So
so that's exciting. And we've we've we're doing
the main contributors to the reference implementation of
that, which is, like, Envoy gateway. Like, real
real simple
ingress gateway based on Envoy talks to gateway
API. Like, it should hopefully become the de
facto standard there.
And we do Wasm stuff as well. So
if you wanna plug Wasm into Go, if
you wanna build Go into Wasm, you know,
all of those tool chains are other things
that we're working on. So, yeah, we're we're
helping out the ecosystem in in a bunch
of different places there.
Cool.
David,
considering that I just heard your keyword,
Wasm. Yep. Wasm.
Here we go. It's your turn.
No. You plug in.
No. I'm just saying. I know. I'm just
having fun teasing about Wasm. Yeah. I could
just run an episode where I talk about
a cool amplifier. Hey. You did really, really
good. You didn't, like, get into it the
whole time. It was good. Say something about
it, but I did think that's a bit
of a a rabbit hole. But, yeah, Rino's
probably right about the network becoming, like, powerful
and a big lever, but please don't put
business logic there. Like, we've done this before
with the ASPs.
We've done it before with, like, Lua scripts
in your NGINX reverse proxy.
Wasm gives you this amazingly powerful tool and
a great big gun to shoot yourself in
the foot. Like, please don't use BPF or
Wasm to, like, hook the network with business
logic.
That's all I'm gonna say on that. I
mean, like,
if if we don't learn the history Right.
What are we doomed to do? So Need
a bunch of grumpy people on a call
like this to, yeah, tell you how bad
it was. Yeah. Exactly.
I mean, they they try that without WebAssembly
with cloud native network functions, like, that where
every every network thing was supposed to be
a container. I mean, that was the thing
for, like, two minutes. Right? There's many ways
to do it. There's also people who trudge
up this uphill in the snow both ways.
You know, we can argue about that. That'd
be fun. But thanks for joining us. If
you wanna keep up with us, consider subscribing
to the podcast
on your favorite podcasting app or even go
to cloudnativecompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic,
reach out to us on any social media
platform. Until next time when exploring the cloud
native landscape
on three. On 3. 1,
2, 3.
Don't forget your compass. Forget your compass.